---
jupytext:
  formats: md:myst
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.11.5
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3
  language: python
  name: python3
---

# Task 2
As a part of this task, we are to solve the mean-field $\alpha-\omega$ dynamo equations in the kinematic regime. 

## Mean-Field Dynamo Theory
Mean-field dynamo theory is a significant concept in astrophysics, particularly in understanding large-scale phenomena like the generation of large-scale magnetic fields in stars and galaxies. It describes the generation of magnetic fields on scales larger than those of the driving flow. These large scale magnetic fields arise due to the differential rotation and helical interstellar turbulence of galaxies and accretion disks. The generation of mean flows by small-scale correlations is often parameterized using the $\alpha$-effect and the $\Omega$-effect. While the alpha effect contributes to generating poloidal fields from toroidal fields, the omega effect plays a role in converting toroidal fields back into poloidal fields.

### $\alpha$-Effect
The Alpha effect arises due to the interaction between fluid turbulence and magnetic fields. In regions of strong turbulence, the fluid motion twists and shears the magnetic field lines, leading to the creation of small-scale magnetic loops. These loops contribute to the mean electromotive force, resulting in the amplification of the mean magnetic field. Thus, it provides a means for the small-scale dynamo action to sustain and amplify the large-scale magnetic field. Moreover, this effect enables the conversion of poloidal magnetic fields, typically generated by differential rotation, into toroidal ones, which are crucial for the dynamo process to be self-sustaining.

### $Omega$-Effect
The Omega effect represents a key mechanism within Mean Field Dynamo Theory, wherein the differential rotation of a conducting fluid induces an electromotive force (EMF) perpendicular to both the mean magnetic field and the rotation axis. In regions where there is a gradient in angular velocity, the differential rotation twists and amplifies the pre-existing magnetic fields, leading to the generation of toroidal magnetic fields from initially poloidal ones.

Assuming the following assumptions-

- Thin-disk approximation: Terms of order $h^2/r^2$ are neglected.

- The turbulent diffusivity $\eta_t$ is assumed to be a constant scalar in space and time, and the microscopic diffusivity $\eta$ is neglected. $\alpha$ reduces to a psudoscalar.

- Assume axisymmetric solutions, i.e., set $\partial / \partial \phi = 0$

$$
\begin{gathered}
\frac{\partial \bar{B}r}{\partial t}=-\frac{\bar{V}_r}{r} \frac{\partial}{\partial r}\left(r \bar{B}_r\right)-\frac{\partial}{\partial z}\left(\bar{V}_z \bar{B}_r\right)-\frac{\partial}{\partial z}\left(\alpha \bar{B}\phi\right)+\eta_{\mathrm{t}}\left\{\frac{\partial}{\partial r}\left[\frac{1}{r} \frac{\partial}{\partial r}\left(r \bar{B}_r\right)\right]+\frac{\partial^2 \bar{B}_r}{\partial z^2}\right\} \\
\frac{\partial \bar{B}\phi}{\partial t}=-q \Omega \bar{B}_r-\frac{\partial}{\partial r}\left(\bar{V}_r \bar{B}\phi\right)-\frac{\partial}{\partial z}\left(\bar{V}z \bar{B}\phi\right)+\frac{\partial}{\partial z}\left(\alpha \bar{B}r\right)+\eta{\mathrm{t}}\left\{\frac{\partial}{\partial r}\left{\frac{1}{r} \frac{\partial}{\partial r}\left(r \bar{B}\phi\right)\right}+\frac{\partial^2 \bar{B}\phi}{\partial z^2}\right\},
\end{gathered}
$$
where $q \equiv-\mathrm{d} \ln \Omega / \mathrm{d} \ln r=-(r / \Omega) \mathrm{d} \Omega / \mathrm{d} r$.
 

- $\alpha-\Omega$ approximation: Further, terms that include $\alpha$ in the equation for $\partial B_\phi/\partial t$ are neglected, and this is a valid approximation when
$|q|\Omega >> |\alpha|/h$.

- Finally, set $\bar{V}_r = \bar{V}_z = 0$

- With these assumptions, the $r$ and $\phi$-components of the mean-field Induction equation in cylindrical coordinates are-

$$
\begin{array}{l}
\frac{\partial \bar{B}_r}{\partial r}=-\frac{\partial}{\partial z}\left(\alpha \bar{B}_\phi\right)+\eta_t\left{\frac{\partial}{\partial r}\left[\frac{1}{r} \frac{\partial}{\partial r}\left(r \bar{B}_r\right)\right]+\frac{\partial^2 \bar{B}_r}{\partial z^2}\right}, \\
\frac{\partial \bar{B}d}{\partial r}=-q\Omega \bar{B}_r+\eta_t\left{\frac{\partial}{\partial r}\left{\frac{1}{r} \frac{\partial}{\partial r}\left(r \bar{B}_\phi\right)\right}+\frac{\partial^2 \bar{B}_\phi}{\partial z^2}\right},
\end{array}
$$

These equations do not depend on $\bar{B}_z$. To get $\bar{B}_z$, we can solve

$$
\nabla \cdot \bar{B}=\frac{1}{r} \frac{\partial}{\partial r}\left(r \bar{B}_r\right)+\frac{\partial \bar{B}_2}{\partial z}=0
$$

Now, the no-Z approximation is made to finally give the equations:

$\begin{aligned} & \frac{\partial \bar{B}r}{\partial \widetilde{t}}=-\frac{\partial}{\partial \widetilde{z}}\left(\widetilde{\alpha} \bar{B}\phi\right)+\frac{\partial}{\partial \widetilde{r}}\left{\frac{1}{\widetilde{r}} \frac{\partial}{\partial \widetilde{r}}\left(\widetilde{r} \bar{B}r\right)\right}+\frac{\partial^2 \bar{B}_r}{\partial \widetilde{z}^2}, \\ & \frac{\partial \bar{B}\phi}{\partial \widetilde{t}}=-q \widetilde{\Omega} \bar{B}r+\frac{\partial}{\partial \widetilde{r}}\left[\frac{1}{\widetilde{r}} \frac{\partial}{\partial \widetilde{r}}\left(\widetilde{r} \bar{B}\phi\right)\right]+\frac{\partial^2 \bar{B}_\phi}{\partial \widetilde{z}^2} .\end{aligned}$

where $\widetilde{t} = t/t_0, \widetilde{z} = z/h_0, \widetilde{r} = r/h_0, \widetilde{\alpha} = t_0 \alpha/h_0, \widetilde{\Omega} = \Omega t_0$

Some parameters that we have chosen 
